## Exercise: Loops and Functions

[[Exercise: Loops and Functions] https://go.dev/tour/flowcontrol/8](https://go.dev/tour/flowcontrol/8)

### !!! SPOILER ALERT !!!
#### Below, I'll show my solution to this exercise and explain why I did what I did. It's very important to take your own shot at the exercise before reading this. 

So this will be an iterative algorithm. That means we'll iterate doing trial and error until the error value becomes somewhat acceptable. So I'll start by defining this threshold value as a constant
```go
const target float64 = 0.01
```
This means I'll continue iterating through my loop until the difference between my last two iteration drops below this target value.
Inside the `Sqrt` function, I'll define two variables of type `float64`. The variable named `z` will hold the current square root value, while the variable `t` will hold the difference between iterations.
```go
z, diff := 1.0, 1.0
```
Now we'll need a loop that'll run until the difference drops below the target value. We [know](1-2-3-4.md) that Go doesn't have a `while` keyword, it'll be a `for` loop behaving like a `while`.  
```go
for diff > target {
// ToDo: Add calculations here
}
```
A note on the difference between the iterations here. If the initial value of `z` is below the actual square root value (and if we use 1.0 as the initial value as the exercise suggests it'll most probably will be), the first difference value will be negative. So if we check the condition like we did just before, the loop will exit after the first iteration. Because of this, we have to use the absolute value of the difference. We'll use the `Abs` function from the [math package](https://pkg.go.dev/math#Abs). 
```go
for math.Abs(diff) > target {
// ToDo: Add calculations here
}
```
Inside the loop, we'll set the `diff` variable to `(z*z - x) / (2 * z)` and substract this value from `z`.

The final code will be like this.

```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"
	"math"
)

const target float64 = 0.01

func Sqrt(x float64) float64 {
	z, diff := 1.0, 1.0
	for math.Abs(diff) > target {
		diff = (z*z - x) / (2 * z)
		z -= diff
		fmt.Printf("z:%f diff:%f\n", z, diff)
	}
	return z
}

func main() {
	fmt.Println(Sqrt(2))
	fmt.Println(math.Sqrt(2))
}
```
[Run on Go Playground](https://go.dev/play/p/F6cQayTn7kM)

---

| [Previous](5-6-7.md) | [Home](../../index.md) | [Next] |