## Variables, Variables with initializers and Short variable declarations

[[Variables] https://go.dev/tour/basics/8](https://go.dev/tour/basics/8)

[[Variables with initializers] https://go.dev/tour/basics/9](https://go.dev/tour/basics/9)

[[Short variable declarations] https://go.dev/tour/basics/10](https://go.dev/tour/basics/10)

In Go, there are three ways to declare and initialize a variable. The following is the most explicit way.
```go
var a int = 5
// or
var b int
...
b = 5
```
You can omit the type if you're initialize your variable at the same time and let type variable take the type of its initializer.
```go
var a = 5
```
Or you can even omit the keyword `var` and use `:=` short assignment statement if the code is within a function.
```go
a := 5
```

So far, you may already have the impression of me preferring explicit ways over implicit ones, and you would be right. But for variable declaration, I prefer the most implicit one wherever it is applicable with some exceptions. On the same code line, I never use short declaration for more than three variables, and never for variables for different types as I think these practices hurt readability. The code below contains examples of these **big no**s in short declaration form.
```go
a, b, c, d := 42, 0, 246, 5
x, y, z := 360, 3.14159, false
```

Go never converts one type to other implicitly like some other languages do. For example in C#, it's possible to convert a variable implicitly to another one if the source type is a subset of the target type. Following example converts a varible of type int to a variable of type float implicitly because int is essentially a subset of float.
```c#
// Implicit conversion. A long can
// hold any value an int can hold, and more!
int num = 2147483647;
float flNum = num;
```

But the same code is not valid for Go. When you try to run the following code
```go
package main

import "fmt"

func main() {
	var num int = 2147483647
	var flNum float64 = num
	fmt.Println(flNum)
}
``` 
[Run on Go Playground](https://go.dev/play/p/uaSFA-LEuhx)

you'll get this result
```
./prog.go:7:6: cannot use num (type int) as type float64 in assignment
```

Type conversions is a subject we'll get soon, so we'll not go into details of conversion here. My main point here, because there's no implicit conversion in Go, there's no risk of using more implicit ways of variable declaration besides readability. Consider the following code: It has a method called `returnSomething` that's supposed to return a `float64` but what it returns is `2` which which is an [integer literal](https://go.dev/ref/spec#Integer_literals). Even then the variable `num` will be initialized as `float64`.
```go
package main

import "fmt"

func main() {
	num := returnSomething()
	fmt.Println(num)
		fmt.Printf("The value of num is %v and the type is %T", num, num) // %T format verb prints Go-syntax representation of the type of the value
}

func returnSomething() float64 {
	return 2
}
```
[Run on Go Playground](https://go.dev/play/p/OjUq-p4uapy)

The output will clearly show that the type of variable is `float64` 
```
The value of num is 2 and the type is float64
```

### Variable Shadowing
Another subject worth mentioning here is variable shadowing. Consider the following code. 
```go
package main

import "fmt"

var num int = 5

func main() {
	fmt.Printf("num started as %d\n", num)
	var num int = 3
	fmt.Printf("num ended as %d\n", num)
	another()
}

func another() {
	fmt.Printf("num is %d\n", num)
}
```
[Run on Go Playground](https://go.dev/play/p/nEs6A4lH45b)

What do you think this program's output will be? A syntax error because num is declared twice within `main` function? `num started as 0` (which is the zero value of int) and `num ended as 3` and then `num is 5` from the function `another`? Run it and see it for yourselves. The output will be 
```
num started as 5
num ended as 3
num is 5
```
and that's because of variable shadowing. When you redaclare a variable again in an inner scope, that new variable shadows, **but does not overwrite** the outer scoped one. The outer scoped variable is still there (as you clearly can see that function `another` can still access it) but you **shadowed** it within the function `main`.

**Variable shadowing is dangerous. Especially on bigger codebases and packages distributed among many files. It will create unexpected behaviours which are very hard to spot. Short declarations make it even harder to spot. Always beware of its existence and keep an eye on it.**

---

| [Previous](6-7.md) | [Home](../../index.md) | [Next](11-12.md) |